This repository contains a collection of command line utilities.

- arsort       - topologically sort static libraries
- benchmark.sh - run a command multiple times and report stats
- benchmark.py - run a command multiple times and report stats (more features)
- check-cert   - check approaching expiration/validate certs of remote servers
- check-dnsbl  - check if mailservers are DNS blacklisted/have rDNS records
- check2junit  - convert libcheck XML to Jenkins/JUnit compatible XML
- latest-kernel-running - is the latest installed kernel actually running?
- lockf        - protect command execution with a lock
- pwhatch      - generate secure and easy to communicate passwords
- silence      - silence stdout/stderr unless command fails
- silencce     - C++ implementation of silence
- train-spam   - feed spam maildir messages into bogofilter and remove them
- user-installed.py - list manually installed packages on major distributions

For example:

    $ crontab -l
    15 10 * * * silence backup_stuff.sh /home


2016, Georg Sauthoff <mail@georg.so>

## Check-Cert

This script calls [`gnutls-cli`][gnutls] for the specified remote
services.

Example:

    $ check-cert.py imap.example.org_993 example.org_443

Any validation errors (including OCSP ones) reported by
[GnuTLS][gnutls] are printed by the script, which finally returns
with exit status unequal zero. The script also warns and exits
unsuccessfully if a cert expires in less than 20 days.

If everything is fine the script is silent and exits
successfully, thus, check-cert is suitable for a Cron scheduled
execution.

Checking a service that does TLS after a STARTTLS command like in

   $ check-cert.py mail.example.org_25_smtp

requires GnuTLS version 3.4.x or later (e.g. 3.4.15). For example,
RHEL/CentOS 7 comes with GnuTLS 3.3.8, while Fedora 23 provides
gnutls 3.4.15.

It may make sense to create a `gnutls-cli` wrapper script and put
it into `$PATH` such that the right version is called with the
right CA bundle, e.g.:

    #!/bin/bash
    exec /nix/var/nix/profiles/default/bin/gnutls-cli \
      --x509cafile=/etc/pki/tls/cert.pem "$@"


The script doesn't use the comparable Openssl command (i.e. `openssl
s_client`) because it doesn't conveniently present the
expiration dates and it doesn't even exit with a status unequal
zero in case of verification errors.

## Check-DNSBL

This utility checks a list of mail servers against some [well
known blacklists
(DNSBL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_DNS_blacklists)
By default, 30 or so lists are queried, but other/additional ones
can be specified via command line arguments or a CSV file.

It also checks, by default, if there are [reverse
DNS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_DNS_lookup) records
and if they match the forward ones.

The mail server can be specified as a list of IPv4 or IPv6
addresses and/or domain names. MX records are followed, by
default. Of course, an outgoing mail server doesn't necessarily
have to double as MX - in those cases its domain/address has to
be additionally specified.  In any case, if domains are
specified, at last, they are resolved via their A or AAAA records
to IPv4 or IPv6 addresses.

If everything is ok, `check-dnsbl.py` doesn't generate any output
(unless `--debug` is specified). Otherwise, it prints errors to
stderr and exits with a status unequal zero. Thus, it can be
used as Cron job for monitoring purposes.

Examples:

Something is listed:

    $ ./check-dnsbl.py 117.246.201.146
    2016-11-05 19:01:13 - ERROR    - There is no reverse DNS record for 117.246.201.146
    2016-11-05 19:01:13 - ERROR    - OMG, 117.246.201.146 is listed in DNSBL zen.spamhaus.org: 127.0.0.11 ("https://www.spamhaus.org/query/ip/117.246.201.146")
    2016-11-05 19:01:19 - ERROR    - OMG, 117.246.201.146 is listed in DNSBL virbl.dnsbl.bit.nl: 127.0.0.2 ("See: http://virbl.bit.nl/lookup/index.php?ip=117.246.201.146")
    2016-11-05 19:01:19 - ERROR    - 117.246.201.146 is listed in 2 blacklists

Everything is ok:

    $ ./check-dnstbl.py mail1.example.org mail2.example.org example.net
    $ echo $?
    0


## Check2junit

[Jenkins][jenkins] comes with the [JUnit plugin][junit] that
draws some nice graphs and creates reports from XML generated by
JUnit testsuite runs. For example, there is a graph with the
number of successful/failed testcases over the builds and there
are graphs that display the duration of single test cases over
the builds.

The [libcheck][check] unittest C library also supports the
generation of an XML report.

This scripts converts the libcheck XML format into the XML format
supported by the Jenkins JUnit plugin.

Example (e.g. part of a build script):

    CK_XML_LOG_FILE_NAME=test1.xml ./check_network
    CK_XML_LOG_FILE_NAME=test2.xml ./check_backend
    check2junit.py test1.xml test2.xml > junit.xml

The JUnit plugin can be configured in the Jenkins job
configuration, basically it has to be added as another post-build
action (where the input filename can be set, e.g.
to `junit.xml`).

### Related

- The C++ unittest library [Catch](https://github.com/philsquared/Catch/blob/master/docs/build-systems.md#junit-reporter) has JUnit XML output support built in.
- Related to the integration of unittest results is also the
  integration of coverage reports into Jenkins. A good solution
  for this is to use the Jenkins [Cobertura plugin](https://wiki.jenkins-ci.org/display/JENKINS/Cobertura+Plugin), generate the coverage report with lcov and convert it with the [lcov-to-cobertura-xml](https://github.com/eriwen/lcov-to-cobertura-xml.git) script. The lcov HTML reports can also be included with the Jenkins [HTML publisher plugin](https://wiki.jenkins-ci.org/display/JENKINS/HTML+Publisher+Plugin)
- Easiest to integrate with C/C++ builds is the Jenkins [Warnings plugin](https://wiki.jenkins-ci.org/display/JENKINS/Warnings+Plugin) as it natively suports GCC warnings.


## Latest Kernel

This script checks if the system actually runs the latest
installed kernel. This might not be the case if something like
yum-cron automatically installs updates or if somebody forgot to
restart the system after a kernel update.

A mismatch in kernel versions is reported via the exit status.
With option `-v` a diagnostic message is printed, as well.

Thus, the script can be used to send out notification mails (e.g.
when running it as cron job).

Alternatively, the result  can be used to initiate a restart of a
machine that already runs yum-cron. If the machine provides a
clustered service, the restart can be coordinated with something
like etcd.

This check complements what [tracer][tracer] does.
Tracer checks if outdated applications or libraries are loaded
but (currently) doesn't check the kernel (cf. [Issue 45][tracer45]).


## Lockf

`lockf` only executes a provided command if a lock can be
aquired. Thus, it is able to serialize command execution and
guard access to exclusive actions. It provides several
locking methods:

- [`lockf()`][lockf] - hence the name
- [`fcntl()`][fcntl]
- [`flock()`][flock] - BSD API, also supported by e.g. Linux
- [`open(..., ... O_CREAT | O_EXCL)`][open] - exclusive file creation
- [`link()`][link] - hardlinking
- [`mkdir()`][mkdir] - not necessarily atomic everywhere
- [`rename()`][rename] - rename is also atomic

All of the methods are available on Linux. They also specified by
POSIX, except `flock()` which comes from BSD.

The methods `lockf()`, `fcntl()` and `flock()` support waiting on
a lock without polling (`-b` option).

Whether different lock methods do interact depends is system
specific. For example, on recent Linux, `fcntl()` and `flock()`
don't interact unless they are on NFS. And POSIX allows
interaction between `lockf()` and `fcntl()` but doesn't require
it.

Not all methods are necessarily supported and work reliable over
NFS. Especially in a heterogenous environment. Existing
implementation may chose to return success even if they implement
a locking API as null operation. Also, with some NFS
implementations some methods may become unreliable in case of
packet loss or a rebooting NFS server. For NFS, the methods worth
looking into are `lockf()`, `fcntl()`, `open()` and `link()`.
`mkdir()` is not specified by NFS to be atomic. Linux supports
`flock()` over NFS since kernel 2.6.37, but only because it is
emulated via `fcntl()` then.

Similar utilties:

- [Linux-Util flock][lu-flock], uses `flock()`
- [BSD lockf][bsd-lockf], uses `flock()` despite the name
- [lockrun][lockrun], uses `lockf()` where available, `flock()`
  otherwise
- [Procmail lockfile][lockfile], uses `link()` and supports polling

See also:

- [Correct locking in shell scripts?][1]

## Silence

`silence` is command wrapper that executes a command with its
arguments such that its stdout/stderr are written to unlinked
temporary files. In case the command exits with return code
unequal zero, the temporary files are streamed to stdout and
stderr of `silence`. Otherwise, the temporary files (under `TMPDIR`
or `/tmp`) vanish when both `silence` and the called command exit.

This is useful e.g. for job schedulers like cron, where
the output is only of interest in the event of failure. With
cron, the output of a program also triggers a notification mail
(another trigger is the return code).

`silence` provides the -k option for terminating the child in case
it is terminated before the child has exited. On Linux, this is
implemented via installing SIGTERM as parent death signal in its
child before it executes the supplied command. On other systems
the parent death signal mechanism  is approximated via installing
a signal handler for SIGTERM that kills the child.

The utility is a C reimplementation of [moreutils
chronic][moreutils] that is written in Perl. Thus, it has less
runtime overhead, especially less startup overhead.  The
unittests actually contain 2 test cases that fail for moreutils
chronic because of the startup overhead. Another difference is
that moreutils chronic buffers stdout and stderr lines in memory,
where `silence` writes them to temporary files, thus avoiding
memory issues with noisy long running commands. Also, moreutils
chronic doesn't provide means to get the child killed when it is
terminated. Other differences are documented in the unittest
cases (cf.  `test/chronic.py`).

## Silencce

`silencce` is a C++ implementation of `silence`. The main difference
is the usage of exceptions, thus simplifying the error reporting.

## User-Installed

`user-installed.py` lists all the packages that were manually
selected, i.e. that are marked as user-installed in the local
package database because a user explicitly installed them. That
means packages that were installed by the system installer or as
automatic dependencies aren't listed.

It supports different distributions:
Fedora, CentOS, RHEL, Termux, Debian and Ubuntu

Such a package list can be used for:

- preparing a kickstart file
- 'cloning' a good package selection of one system
- restoring the package selection after a vanilla install (e.g.
  because of a major distribution version upgrade or a system
  recovery)

Excluding the automatically installed packages from the list
protects against:

- installing old dependency packages that are now obsolete on the
  new version of the distribution
- wrongly marking the old dependency packages as user-installed
  on the new system
- and thus making auto-cleaning after a future package removal of
  then unneeded dependency packages ineffective
- failed installs due to dependency packages that are removed in
  the new distribution version

Example for restoring a package list on a Fedora system:

    # dnf install $(cat example-org.pkg.lst)

Ignoring any unavailable packages:

    # dnf install --setopt=strict=0 $(cat example-org.pkg.lst)

## Build Instructions

Get the source:

    $ git clone https://github.com/gsauthof/utility.git

Out of source builds are recommended, e.g.:

    $ mkdir utility-bin && cd utility-bin
    $ cmake ../utility
    $ make

Or to use ninja instead of make and create a release build:

    $ mkdir utility-bin-o && cd utility-bin-o
    $ cmake -G Ninja -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ../utility
    $ ninja-build

## Unittests

    $ make check

or

    $ ninja-build check

## License

[GPLv3+][gpl]

[1]: http://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/22044/correct-locking-in-shell-scripts
[bsd-lockf]: https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=lockf
[gpl]: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
[fcntl]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/fcntl.2.html
[flock]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/flock.2.html
[gnutls]: https://gnutls.org/
[link]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/link.2.html
[lockf]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/lockf.3.html
[lockfile]: http://linux.die.net/man/1/lockfile
[lockrun]: http://www.unixwiz.net/tools/lockrun.html
[lu-flock]: http://linux.die.net/man/1/flock
[mkdir]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/mkdir.2.html
[moreutils]: the://joeyh.name/code/moreutils/
[open]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/open.2.html
[rename]: http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/rename.2.html
[tracer]: http://tracer-package.com/
[tracer45]: https://github.com/FrostyX/tracer/issues/45
[jenkins]: https://jenkins.io/
[junit]: https://wiki.jenkins-ci.org/display/JENKINS/JUnit+Plugin
[libcheck]: https://libcheck.github.io/check/

